---
title: A Practical Guide To SEO In Nuxt 3
featured_image: /article-image.png
draft: true
date: March 4, 2023
read_time: 6 min
---




> This article assumes you have basic knowledge of Vue js and Nuxt.



As much as SPA frameworks allow us quickly prototype web applications, they, unfortunately, come with their bottlenecks, one of which is SEO management. As the name implies, Single-Page Applications are single-paged. This means only a single page (entry point) is rendered while data (template/JSON) is updated on demand using Javascript. However, when building applications like e-commerce/blog sites with dynamic metadata information, SPAs don’t quite get the job done neatly.

In this article, I’ll show you how to set up an SEO-friendly application in Nuxt and at the end, we will have built this mini e-commerce app in Nuxt:


**Requirements**
- Nuxt 3
- Nodejs LTS — If you have an existing node version, you can use NVM to manage your versions.
- NPM 9.5


**Setup**  
To get started, be sure you have the latest Nodejs LTS version running (18.14.2 at the time of writing), which also ships with NPM version 9.5.0.
We’ll install and set up our project in Nuxt 3. First, install npx — it’s like npm but on steroids.

Right off the installation, we get just the basic files. We’ll create a pages folder to house our pages. Next, we move the entry app.vue file from the root folder into the pages folder and rename this file to index.vue. You don’t have to configure anything else, as Nuxt knows where to look to find the routes.

TIP: Restart the server if Nuxt doesn’t automatically pick up your new entry file.
We’ll also need a second page to show the product detail when clicked. We can name this page [id].vue . This is how we create dynamic routes in Nuxt 3. We’ll also move this new file into a details folder.

**Build & Deploy**  
Unfortunately, we can not deploy our Nuxt app like traditional SPAs. We have two options:
- Deploying as a Statically Generated Site, or
- Deploying as a Server Side Rendered App.

Which should you choose? I recommend deploying it as an SSR application if you’re building something like an e-commerce site. However, you should go with SSG builds if you’re building a blog. This is because blogs have a definite amount of data compared to E-commerce sites.
First, let’s build and deploy as an SSG. Run yarn generate and wait while Nuxt crawls through each dynamic route and builds them into individual static pages.

**Conclusion**  
Hopefully, this tutorial was helpful. However, the journey to building an SEO-friendly web application continues beyond meta descriptions. Some other things that are worth considering:
- **XML Sitemaps** — Crawlers will always crawl, and you need to feed these crawlers for better search engine performance. So be sure to generate sitemaps for your applications.
- **Accessibility** — Be sure your applications are very accessible to crawlers and screen readers. Images have readable alt descriptions, and non-interactive elements also have proper alternative attributes.
- **Run Periodic SEO Audits** — If your application deals with new content every other week, run periodic SEO audits as often as necessary and keep your applications in the greens.


---------------